What is the linux kernel ?
This is the major interface between a computer hardware and its processes. It manages the hardware connected to the
operating system so that the processes can use them.

Think of it as the invisible middleman. Your software (like Chrome or kubectl) doesn't know how to talk
to your RAM or your CPU directly; it asks the Kernel to do it on its behalf.

The 4 Main Jobs of the Kernel

1.Memory Management: It keeps track of how much memory is used and which processes are using it.

2.Process Management: It decides which process gets to use the CPU, for how long, and at what priority.

3.Device Drivers: It acts as the bridge between the hardware (keyboard, mouse, disk drive) and the software.

4.System Calls: It provides a secure way for programs to ask the hardware to do something (like "write this data to the disk").
MPDS

An Operating System is a collection of software that manages computer hardware and provides common services
for computer programs. While the kernel is the "major interface" you mentioned, the OS is the complete package
that makes the computer usable for a human

If the Kernel is the engine of a car, the Operating System (OS) is the entire vehicle—the seats, the steering wheel,
the dashboard, and the GPS.

user@polom-dev-bastion-vm:~$ uname -r   # this is how to see the kernel version
6.1.0-40-cloud-amd64


Understanding the "Great Divide" between Kernel Space and User Space is key.
This separation is all about security and stability. It prevents a bug in a simple app (like a calculator)
from crashing your entire computer.

1. User Space
This is where your everyday applications live. When you run kubectl, nano, or a web browser, they run here.

Restricted Access: Applications here cannot touch the hardware directly. They can't just "grab" RAM or write to
the disk whenever they want.

Safety Net: If a program in user space crashes, it usually only affects that one program. Your computer stays running.

Communication: To get anything done (like saving a file), the app must send a "System Call" to the Kernel.


2. Kernel Space
This is the "VIP lounge" of your computer. This is where the Kernel resides and executes its tasks.

Full Access: The Kernel has unrestricted access to the CPU, RAM, and all hardware.

High Risk: If something goes wrong in Kernel space (like a buggy driver), it results in a Kernel Panic
(the Linux version of the Blue Screen of Death). The whole system stops.

Privileged Mode: The CPU actually switches into a special "protected mode" to run code here.


Working With Linux Hardware
System Call: You (User Space) tell the waiter, "I’d like the steak, please." You are requesting a resource.

Event: The waiter (Kernel) comes by and says, "The kitchen is closing in 10 minutes."
They are notifying you of a condition, and it's up to you how to react.

Suppose a hard disk is connected to the OS, the device driver the kernel space detects and send an event to the user space
daemon called udev, udev is responsible for created the /dev/sdb1 for the hard disk.


dmesg
This is used to display messages from the kernel(kernel ring buffer) and events from the kernel
dmesg | grep -i usb


udevadm
This is use to manage devices connected


lscpi
This is used to display all pci devices connected to the pci slot, like ethernet interface

lsblk
This list the block device that is connected to the device.

lscpu
This displays  information about the CPU architecture

lsmem  or free -m
To display memory

lshw
It displays all  hardware

The Boot Process

Here is the 4-step sequence:

1. BIOS/UEFI (The Hardware Check)
The moment you hit the power button, the CPU wakes up and looks for a tiny piece of software stored on the motherboard's flash memory.

POST (Power-On Self-Test): It checks if your RAM, Keyboard, and SSD are alive.

Hand-off: It looks for a "Boot Loader" on your disk (like a tiny signpost saying "The OS is this way").

2. Bootloader (GRUB)
The most common bootloader for Linux is GRUB.

The Selector: This is that menu you sometimes see where you can choose between "Ubuntu" or "Advanced Options."

Loading the Kernel: Its main job is to copy the Linux Kernel from the disk into the RAM so it can start running.

3. Kernel Initialization
Now the Kernel takes control. This is the part you see when you run sudo dmesg | head -n 50.

Hardware Probe: The Kernel scans the hardware again (more deeply than the BIOS) and loads the necessary drivers.

Root Filesystem: It mounts the disk (the / directory) so it can reach your files.

The Final Spark: Once the Kernel is happy, it starts the very first User Space process: PID 1.

4. systemd (The Manager)
In almost all modern Linux systems (like your Ubuntu VM), PID 1 is systemd.

The Architect: systemd is the "parent" of everything else. It starts your networking, your login screen (GUI),
and background services like SSH.

Target Reached: Once it finishes loading everything, it presents you with the login prompt.




Run Levels

Old Runlevel,New systemd Target,What it means
1,rescue.target,Single-user mode (for fixing things).
3,multi-user.target,Non-graphical (Command line only).
5,graphical.target,Desktop environment (GNOME/KDE).
6,reboot.target,The system is shutting down to restart.


sudo systemctl get-default

systemctl set-default multi-user.target


Types of files in linux

Character,    File Type,     Description
-,           Regular File,  "Data, scripts, or binaries."
d,           Directory,      A container for other files.
l,              Link,        A pointer to another file.
c,         Character Device, Unbuffered hardware access (keyboard).
b,          Block Device,    Buffered hardware access (HDD/SSD).
s,          Local Socket,    Networking/IPC communication.
p,           Named Pipe,     Sequential process communication.


Directory,Purpose
/,The Root. The starting point of the entire file system.
/bin,"Binaries. Essential command binaries (like ls, cp, bash)."
/etc,Editable Text Configuration. Contains system-wide configuration files.
/home,"User Data. Personal folders for users (e.g., /home/username)."
/root,Superuser Home. The private home directory for the root user.
/dev,"Device Files. Hardware representations (hard drives, terminals)."
/var,"Variable Files. Data that changes frequently, like logs and spool files."
/tmp,Temporary. Files deleted upon reboot (usually).
/usr,User System Resources. The largest directory; contains shared libraries and programs.